Assignment statements (#2511)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: docs/design/assignment.md

# Assignment

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Overview](#overview)
-   [Syntax](#syntax)
-   [Simple assignment semantics](#simple-assignment-semantics)
-   [Built-in types](#built-in-types)
-   [Tuples, structs, and classes](#tuples-structs-and-classes)
-   [Extensibility](#extensibility)
    -   [Simple assignment](#simple-assignment)
    -   [Arithmetic](#arithmetic)
    -   [Bitwise and bit-shift](#bitwise-and-bit-shift)
    -   [Defaults](#defaults)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
-   [References](#references)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Overview

Values can be assigned to variables using the `=` operator:

```
var a: i32 = 5;
a = 6;
```

For each binary [arithmetic](expressions/arithmetic.md) or

> [bitwise](expressions/bitwise.md) operator `$`, a corresponding compound

Reviewer: I like the usage of "`$`" and "`$=`" below, but I think "`$`" is a distraction here because there is no accompanying "`$=`".

Author: Good point, added a `$=` here.

> [bitwise](expressions/bitwise.md) operator `$`, a corresponding compound
> assignment is provided that performs the operation in-place:

Author: ```suggestion
[bitwise](expressions/bitwise.md) operator `$`, a corresponding compound
assignment `$=` is provided that performs the operation in-place:
```

```
// Same as `a = a + 1;`
a += 1;
// Same as `a = a << 3;`
a <<= 3;
```

In addition, increment and decrement operators are provided:

```
// Same as `a = a + 1;`
++a;
// Same as `a = a - 1;`
--a;
```

These simple assignment, compound assignment, increment, and decrement operators
can only be used as complete statements, not as subexpressions of other
operators, even when parenthesized:

```
var n: i32;
// Error, assignment is not permitted as a subexpression.
if (F() and (n = GetValue()) > 5) {
}
```

User-defined types can define the meaning of these operations by
[implementing an interface](#extensibility) provided as part of the Carbon
standard library.

## Syntax

> The operands of these operators can be any [expression](expressions/README.md).

Reviewer 2: Are there any parsing concerns, e.g. how is `a*=b` interpreted? Is that a postfix `*` (as in `i32*`) or `*=`?

Author: That ends up being a lexical consideration, not a parsing one: `*=` is a single token, regardless of whitespace before the `*.` Per [the current lexing design](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/tree/trunk/docs/design/lexical_conventions), as decided in #601, we always form the longest lexical element we can, so there's no possibility of forming a `*` token when the next two characters are `*=`.

This does mean that `var v: i32*=nullptr;` is invalid. I don't think that's a major problem, given that we encourage whitespace around binary operator tokens like `=` anyway.

-   Array indexing that produces a modifiable result.
-   Member access naming a field, where the object is one of these expressions.
-   A conditional expression selecting between these expressions.

## Simple assignment semantics

A simple assignment statement is intended to exactly mirror the semantics of
initialization. The following two code snippets should have the same meaning if
they are both valid:

```
// Declare and initialize.
var v: T = init;
```

```
// Declare separately from initialization.
// Requires that `T` has an unformed state.
var v: T;
v = init;
```

This equivalence is not enforced, but when an object is in an unformed state,
running the assignment function is _optional_, just like running the destructor
is. If the assignment function is not run, the object will be directly
initialized from the right-hand side instead. The type is still required to
implement `AssignFrom` for the assignment to be valid.

```
class C { ... }
fn F() -> C {
  returned var c: C = {...};
  // `&c` here is `&x` for the first call to `F()`.
  // `&c` here can be `&y` for the second call  to `F()`.
  return var;
}
fn G() {
  var x: C = F();
  var y: C;
  y = F();
}
```

> ## Built-in types

Reviewer 3: What are built-in types? I would expect that we'd use all of same interface stuff via the prelude even for integers and such and just have the implementations of the interface functions be built-in?

Author: This is the same style of presentation we use elsewhere in the design.  Eg: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/design/expressions/arithmetic.md#built-in-types

Per the extensibility section below: "Implementations of these interfaces are provided for built-in types as necessary to give the semantics described above."

Author: I've reworked this section a bit to be clearer about what types are in scope here.

For built-in types:

-   For `=`, the right-hand operand is implicitly converted to the type of the
    left-hand operand, and the converted value replaces the value of that
    operand.
-   A `$=` operator is supported in each case where a built-in `$` operator is
    supported, and `a $= b;` behaves the same as `a = a $ b;` except that `a` is
    only evaluated once.
-   For integer types, `++n;` and `--n;` behave the same as `n += 1;` and
    `n -= 1;` respectively. For floating-point types, these operators are not
    provided.

## Tuples, structs, and classes

_TODO_: Describe the rules for assignment in these cases.

See leads issue
[#686: Operation order in struct/class assignment/initialization](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/686)

## Extensibility

Assignment operators can be provided for user-defined types by implementing the
following families of interfaces. Implementations of these interfaces are
provided for built-in types as necessary to give the semantics described above.

### Simple assignment

```
// Simple `=`.

> interface AssignFrom(U:! type) {

Reviewer 3: I find the difference of `AssignFrom` vs `AssignWith` a bit odd .. is there a wording that would work for both?

Author: I don't think we can easily get away from `=` and `$=` being somewhat different here, but perhaps reordering the words would help:

- `Assign` and `AssignFrom` unchanged
- `AssignAdd` and `AssignAddWith`, instead of `AddAssign` and `AddAssignWith`

Using `AssignAddWith` instead of `AddAssignWith` seems more harmonious with `AddWith` I think it makes the `Assign` / `AssignFrom` pair look less strange by making it more different. `AssignAddWith` seems a bit better than `AddAssignWith` to me, `AssignAdd` seems a little worse than `AddAssign`; on balance I think I like these reordered names more.

We could go further and replace `Assign` with `InPlace` for the compound forms:

- `Assign` and `AssignFrom`
- `InPlaceAdd` and `InPlaceAddWith`

I think I'd be happy with that too, but I think we lose something by having `=` in the operator symbol but not having `Assign` in the name.

Does one of those options work better for you?

Reviewer 4: Not fully satisfying, but maybe `AssignGiven` and `AddAssignGiven`

Author: After considering a bunch of options, I've settled on `Assign` / `AssignWith` / `AssignOp` / `AssignOpWith` being the most consistent set of names. I'm not entirely happy with these names, but I'm also not sure we can do better.

Author: After much discussion, reversed `AssignOp` back to `OpAssign`.

```

```
// Compound `>>=`.
interface RightShiftAssignWith(U:! type) {
  fn Op[addr self: Self*](other: U);
}
constraint RightShiftAssign { extends RightShiftAssignWith(Self); }
```

Given `var x: T` and `y: U`:

-   The statement `x &= y;` is rewritten to `x.(BitAndAssignWith(U).Op)(y);`.
-   The statement `x |= y;` is rewritten to `x.(BitOrAssignWith(U).Op)(y);`.
-   The statement `x ^= y;` is rewritten to `x.(BitXorAssignWith(U).Op)(y);`.
-   The statement `x <<= y;` is rewritten to
    `x.(LeftShiftAssignWith(U).Op)(y);`.
-   The statement `x >>= y;` is rewritten to
    `x.(RightShiftAssignWith(U).Op)(y)`;.

Implementations of these interfaces are provided for built-in types as necessary
to give the semantics described above.

### Defaults

An implementation of `OpAssignWith(U)` automatically provides an implementation
of `OpWith(U)`:

```
impl forall [U:! type, T:! OpAssignWith(U)] T as OpWith(U) where .Result = T {
  fn Op[self: Self](other: U) -> Self {
    returned var result: Self = self;
    result.Op(other);
    return var;
  }
}
```

This default is not sufficient to provide implicit conversions on the left-hand

> side of an operator. If such conversions are desired, as separate implementation
> is necessary:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
side of an operator. If such conversions are desired, a separate implementation
is necessary:
```

initialized from the right-hand side instead. The type is still required to
implement `AssignWith` for the assignment to be valid.

```
class C { ... }
fn F() -> C {
  returned var c: C = {...};
  // `&c` here is `&x` for the first call to `F()`.
  // `&c` here can be `&y` for the second call  to `F()`.
  return var;
}
fn G() {
  var x: C = F();
  var y: C;
  y = F();
}
```

## Built-in types

Integers and floating-point types, `bool`, and pointer types support simple
assignment with `=`. The right-hand operand is implicitly converted to the type
of the left-hand operand, and the converted value replaces the value of that
operand.

Compound assignment `$=` for integer and floating point types is
[provided automatically](#defaults) for each supported operator `$`.

For integer types, `++n;` and `--n;` behave the same as `n += 1;` and `n -= 1;`
respectively. For floating-point types, these operators are not provided.

## Tuples, structs, choice types, and data classes

_TODO_: Describe the rules for assignment in these cases.

See leads issue
[#686: Operation order in struct/class assignment/initialization](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/686)

> ## Extensibility
> 
> Assignment operators can be provided for user-defined types by implementing the
> following families of interfaces. Implementations of these interfaces are
> provided for built-in types as necessary to give the semantics described above.
> 

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth documenting the design model we discussed today here -- here is my very rough sketch. Feel free to rewrite though, not sure if this is the best way of expressing it.

```suggestion
## Extensibility

Assignment operators can be provided for user-defined types by implementing the
following families of interfaces. Implementations of these interfaces are
provided for built-in types as necessary to give the semantics described above.

The *compound* assignment operators are expected to fundamentally be syntactic sugar in all cases, and default implementations of them will be synthesized from relevant assignment and operation implementations where available. There is no support for extending types to have compound assignment operators such as `a += b` that do not correspond to the relevant decomposed operators as in `a = a + b`.

In contrast, increment and decrement which are independently extensible. While for most numeric types, increment for example will map to `a = a + 1`, this is not universal or something Carbon defaults. Floating point types are one example where this doesn't hold true, as are types such as non-random-access iterators.
```

Author: Added something along these lines.

// Requires that `T` has an unformed state.
var v: T;
v = init;
```

This equivalence is not enforced, but when an object is in an unformed state,
running the assignment function is _optional_, just like running the destructor
is. If the assignment function is not run, the object will be directly
initialized from the right-hand side instead. The type is still required to
implement `AssignWith` for the assignment to be valid.

```
class C { ... }
fn F() -> C {
  returned var c: C = {...};
  // `&c` here is `&x` for the first call to `F()`.
  // `&c` here can be `&y` for the second call  to `F()`.
  return var;
}
fn G() {
  var x: C = F();
  var y: C;
  y = F();
}
```

## Compound assignment semantics

The syntax `a $= b;` is intended to be syntactic sugar for `a = a $ b;`, except
as follows:

-   A type might be able to provide a more efficient implementation for the
    compound assignment form than for the uncombined form.
-   A type might not be able to, or might not want to, provide the uncombined
    form at all, for example because creating a new instance requires additional
    resources that might not be available, such as a context object or an
    allocator.

> This syntactic sugar is provided by a [default implementation](#defaults) of
> `$=` in terms of `$` and `=`.

Reviewer 3: Actually hitting the button to submit my wording tweak....

```suggestion
The syntactic sugar implementation is provided by a [default implementation](#defaults) of
`$=` in terms of `$` and `=`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The syntactic sugar is implemented by a [default implementation](#defaults)
of `$=` in terms of `$` and `=`.
```

Reviewer 3: LG

> The syntactic sugar is implemented by a [default implementation](#defaults)
> of `$=` in terms of `$` and `=`.

Author: ```suggestion
The syntactic sugar is implemented by a [default implementation](#defaults) of
`$=` in terms of `$` and `=`.
```
